doc/stdenv: add a note about `__structuredAttrs` (#509970)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/stdenv/stdenv.chapter.md

Reviewer: Nit: we should follow [one-sentence-per-line](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/doc/README.md#one-sentence-per-line)

This makes it easier to review and maintain; I'll save specific wording feedback until I can comment on exact sentences.

Author: Nits are always welcome, go ham :)

Unless set to `false`, some build systems with good support for parallel building including `cmake`, `meson`, and `qmake` will set it to `true`.

#### `__structuredAttrs` {#var-stdenv-__structuredAttrs}

`__structuredAttrs` changes the way derivation attributes are passed to the builder. If set to true, attributes are passed as proper bash data types, not unstructured strings.

> This means that builders can reason better about the types of attributes, and don't have to resort to the default string parsing.

Reviewer 2: Environment variables should be passed in the `env` attribute set on mkDerivation

Author: wym? __structuredAttrs isn't an env var AFIAK

Reviewer 3: He means for example lets say you have an env called `NIXOS_TEST` (don't mind the naming, not important), in normal derivations normally you would declare them like this:
```nix
stdenv.mkDerviation {
#....
NIXOS_TEST = true;
#...
}
```

But with `__structuredAttrs` you have to do to parse as `env` which means environment viable and declare them like this:
```nix
stdenv.mkDerviation {
#....
env.NIXOS_TEST = true;
#...
}
```
or 
```nix
stdenv.mkDerviation {
#....
# This is for multiple envs.
env = {
	NIXOS_TEST = true; 
	#...
};
#...
}
```

Author: ah. good catch guys.

Unless set to `false`, some build systems with good support for parallel building including `cmake`, `meson`, and `qmake` will set it to `true`.

#### `__structuredAttrs` {#var-stdenv-__structuredAttrs}

> `__structuredAttrs` changes the way derivation attributes are passed to the builder. If set to true, the other derivation attributes are serialised into a file in JSON format, instead of being exported as bash environment variables. This means that environment variables needed for the build process *must* be added to the `env` attribute, otherwise they will not be exported.

Reviewer: The bit about environment variables is true, but misleading. It wrongly implies that you should migrate all your "input attrs" into `env`.

`__structuredAttrs` does not just produce the JSON file, it also creates structured bash variables (when possible). E.g. it creates bash arrays for nix lists, or associative arrays for simple attrsets.

That is implemented by `NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE`, which most builders source early in the build.

It does not create "exported" environment variables, as bash doesn't support "structured" variables being exported (oversimplifying). So yes, if you really need an _exported_ environment variable, `env.foo` is correct; otherwise `foo` is best.

It'd also be good to refer to the JSON file by name, `NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE`, as this hints at how people can use it.

Author: I've reworked it, what do you think now?

`__structuredAttrs` is a complete replacement for the way attributes are handled currently, and is the preferred default.

> See the nix language documentation for more information: [builder-execution](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.32/store/building.html#builder-execution), [advanced-attributes](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.32/language/advanced-attributes.html#adv-attr-structuredAttrs).

Reviewer: Another section I missed earlier is:
https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.34/store/derivation/#structured-attrs

Maybe we should format these as a bullet-point list?

Unless set to `false`, some build systems with good support for parallel building including `cmake`, `meson`, and `qmake` will set it to `true`.

#### `__structuredAttrs` {#var-stdenv-__structuredAttrs}

> `__structuredAttrs` changes the way derivation attributes are passed to the builder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`__structuredAttrs` defines how derivation attributes are passed to the builder.
```

```suggestion
`__structuredAttrs` controls how derivation attributes are passed to the builder.
```

```suggestion
`__structuredAttrs` configures how derivation attributes are passed to the builder.
```

> If set to true, two files are created, {file}`.attrs.sh` and {file}`.attrs.json`, as well as the environment variables {env}`NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE` and {env}`NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE`, which point to the exact location of their respective file, both in a build, and in a {command}`nix-shell`.

Reviewer: I tried breaking this up into three sentences:

```suggestion
If enabled, two files are created, {file}`.attrs.sh` and {file}`.attrs.json`.
Corresponding environment variables, {env}`NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE` and {env}`NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE`, point to the exact location of their respective file.
The exact locations are especially useful in a {command}`nix-shell`.
```

But I think this is too much detail; I'm not convinced we need to mention the actual filenames, since we should typically use their environment variables. If we don't mention the file names, then we don't need to imply that the env variables are needed in `nix-shell`.

An alternative wording might be something like:

```suggestion
If enabled, a shell script and a JSON representation of the derivation attributes are created.
The environment variables {env}`NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE` and {env}`NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE` point to the exact location of these files.
```

Reviewer 3: Personally I think the alternative sounds better, where as the first suggested change seems confusing to a user.

Author: Yea we can probably elide some of this. Anyone developing will need to visit the cited documentation anyway.

> {file}`.attrs.json` contains the (other) derivation attributes serialised into JSON format.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what is meant by "other" here?

I think it's fine to just say "derivation attributes", since it is essentially all of them; only some internal attributes and non-data attributes are not included.

```suggestion
The {env}`NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE` file contains the derivation attributes that can be serialised as JSON.
```

Author: I meant apart from `__structuredAttrs`, but i can see how it's confusing. This sentence was removed anyway ;)

> {file}`.attrs.sh` contains all parameters that are at most one level deep, with Nix lists being converted to Bash arrays and Nix attribute sets to Bash associative arrays.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about naming `.attrs.sh` instead of `NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE`. It feels like leaking an implementation detail. That said "`NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE` contains ..." would be wrong, because the env var doesn't contain anything other than a filepath; the file it references does. We could do something like "The `NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE` file contains..."?

Otherwise, I tried to tighten the wording a little:

```suggestion
The {env}`NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE` file contains top-level derivation attributes that can be represented as Bash shell variables.
For example, flat lists and attribute sets are represented as Bash arrays and associative arrays, respectively.
```

> This means that attributes intended as environment variables needed for the build process *must* be added to the {option}`env` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attributes intended to be _exported_ as environment variables must be defined in the `env` attribute.
Attributes that can be _local_ to the buildscript should be defined outside of `env`, to benefit from structured shell variables.
```

I tried to balance the wording a bit, to put less emphasis on "you must use `env`" and instead present both sides of the coin.

Author: nice, i think this covers it succinctly

> 

Reviewer: Another thing that may be worth calling out (alongside `env`) is `passAsFile`.

One of structured attrs benefits is that we no longer _need_ `passAsFile` to workaround shell argument length limits:

> This obviates the need for [`passAsFile`](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.34/language/advanced-attributes.html#adv-attr-passAsFile) since JSON files have no size restrictions, unlike process environments.

However, nix (or stdenv?) goes a step further and disables `passAsFile` when `__structuredAttrs` is enabled. At least, if I recall correctly.

If you need to pass large text or json data into a derivation, the "structured attrs way" is to use a tool like `jq` or a JSON-aware buildscript language (instead of bash) to extract the relevant JSON.

E.g. 

```nix
# This replaces `passAsFile = [ "foo" "bar" ]`
stdenv.mkDerivation {

  __structuredAttrs = true;

  foo = { /* some big and complex attrset */ };
  bar = "a reallly long string";

  nativeBuildInputs = [ jq ];

  postUnpack = ''
    jq .foo "$NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE" > foo.json
    jq .bar "$NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE" --raw-output > bar.txt

  '';
  /* src, name, etc omitted */
}
```

> ::: {.warning}

Reviewer: Nit: `warning` feels slightly off to me. We are informing, not warning; at least in my interpretation.

Looking at https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/doc/README.md#admonitions we can choose from:
- `caution`
- `important`
- `note`
- `tip`
- `warning`
- `example`

Here, I wonder if `important` is best?

Author: I agree with important.

`__structuredAttrs` is a complete replacement for the way attributes are handled currently, and is the preferred default.

All new top level packages must enable `__structuredAttrs`.

> When set to true, other advanced attributes such as {option}`allowedReferences`, {option}`allowedRequisites`, {option}`disallowedReferences` and {option}`disallowedRequisites`, {option}`maxSize`, and {option}`maxClosureSize` will have no effect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When enabled, other advanced attributes such as `allowedReferences`, `allowedRequisites`, `disallowedReferences` and `disallowedRequisites`, `maxSize`, and `maxClosureSize` will have no effect.
```

`{option}` is for NixOS module options. A quick grep shows it is only used twice in the nixpkgs manual:
```
$ rg '\{option\}'
README.md
127:- `` {option}`networking.useDHCP` ``

release-notes/rl-2505.section.md
270:  If KMonad is used to execute shell commands, hardening may make some of them fail.  In that case, you can disable hardening using the {option}`services.kmonad.keyboards.<name>.enableHardening` option.
```

That said, this is the kinda thing that should be documented upstream IMO, rather than duplicated in both the Nix and Nixpkgs manuals:

```suggestion
```

Author: whoops, will fix

:::

> See the nix language documentation for examples and more information:

Reviewer: Very nit-picky,[^1] but only one of these links is "nix language", the other two are more general "nix" docs.

"nix language" does a good enough job of distinguishing from nixpkgs, so it's fine as is.

Alternatives could be "upstream nix documentation", "nix documentation"?

```suggestion
See the upstream nix documentation for more detail:
```

[^1]: Feel free to disregard

Author: > Very nit-picky,[1](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/pull/509970#user-content-fn-1-0047e053313a08a9c5139c8625e7c198) but ...

No worries, this what review is for :). 

I also considered adding https://nixos.mayflower.consulting/blog/2020/01/20/structured-attrs/ to the list, but decided against it since it was not official `nix language` documentation. 

I also don't know how up to date the information is....

Do you think it should be added to the list?

Reviewer: I agree it's best to stick to official sources. If they are lacking we should improve them, instead of referencing third-party articles. 👍🏻

  - [advanced-attributes](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.34/language/advanced-attributes.html#adv-attr-structuredAttrs)
  - [builder-execution](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.34/store/building.html#builder-execution)

>   - [structured-attributes](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.34/store/derivation/#structured-attrs)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - [Advanced Derivation Attributes](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.34/language/advanced-attributes.html#adv-attr-structuredAttrs)
  - [Builder Execution](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.34/store/building.html#builder-execution)
  - [Structured Attributes](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/2.34/store/derivation/#structured-attrs)
```

Unless set to `false`, some build systems with good support for parallel building including `cmake`, `meson`, and `qmake` will set it to `true`.

#### `__structuredAttrs` {#var-stdenv-__structuredAttrs}

`__structuredAttrs` defines how derivation attributes are passed to the builder.

If enabled, a shell script and a JSON representation of the derivation attributes are created.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This may flow better as one paragraph?

Author: Sure, but doesn't this break the one-sentence-per-line convention?

Reviewer: No, this is replacing a blank line (`\n\n`) with a single linebreak (`\n`).

Blank lines cause paragraph breaks (`<p>`). Single newlines are rendered as normal spaces.

(Also, 'escaped' newlines get rendered as a line break: ` \\\n` → `<br>`).

The one-sentence-per-line rule is about keeping the markdown sources maintainable and reviewable. Paragraph breaks are about making the rendered output readable.

Author: Ah, thanks. I was already getting quite annoyed with making a new paragraph for each sentence lol

The environment variables {env}`NIX_ATTRS_SH_FILE` and {env}`NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE` point to the exact location of these files.

> Attributes intended to be _exported_ as environment variables must must be defined in the `env` attribute.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Attributes intended to be _exported_ as environment variables must be defined in the `env` attribute.
```

> 

Reviewer: Again
```suggestion
```

Attributes that are _local_ to the buildscript should be defined outside of `env`, to benefit from structured shell variables.

::: {.important}
`__structuredAttrs` is a complete replacement for the way attributes are handled currently, and is the preferred default.

> `passAsFile` is disabled when `__structuredAttrs` is enabled.

Reviewer: How about something like this, to hint at the idiomatic solution?

```suggestion
`passAsFile` is disabled when `__structuredAttrs` is enabled, because you can read from {env}`NIX_ATTRS_JSON_FILE` instead.
```
